Okay, we've got the tapes going.
Mr. Wolf, usually what we do with an author is just ask them a little bit about background
and then get into their work.
But I think with you I'm going to do it the reverse, if you don't mind.
The book of the new son is so such an interesting work that I wanted to start with that.
And I know this question is going to be an awfully big one.
Was there any particular impetus or origin behind that series?
Well, there are a number of things that go together.
Things come together to create a book or to create the idea in the loose sense for a book.
In this case, I'm not sure that I can name anything terribly dramatic.
One of the things that happened was that I was at a science fiction convention and I attended a panel on costuming for the science fiction masquerade.
And as I listened to the various expert costumers talk about how they did it and so forth, it occurred to me that nobody had ever done one of my characters as far as I knew.
And of course I started to sulk about that.
And then I thought of what the characters looked like.
And it occurred to me that one reason that no one had done it was that I did not have very many characters who wore dramatic and interesting clothes.
And so while I was sitting there in the panel, I kind of designed Severian's outfit for him.
And with very few changes, it went into the book in that form.
The cloak, Trouser's boot, Bear Chest, the mask and so forth.
And a part of it was just the idea sparked by the panel that trying to achieve a dramatic visual effect.
Okay, at the end of Volume 1, you have a little end piece, Sign G.W., which I assume is Gene Wolf.
And you present yourself as the translator.
And I wondered how that's possible.
The narrative presumably happened in the future.
So how would Gene Wolf have gotten a whole of a manuscript to translate?
Well, I am dealing with that a little bit in the coda that I'm trying to do now to the book of the new son, The Earth of the New Son,
which I hope to have out in perhaps two or three years.
But if you have read the books, you realize, I hope, that you're dealing with a society, a world, a universe, however you want to put it,
in which time travel is possible.
And if time travel is possible, then it's possible for me to get my hands now on the manuscript that Severian wrote a million years in the future,
or whatever number you care to use.
Okay, good.
Why would you pick a torturer as the protagonist of a series like that?
Well, what I wanted to do was to take someone who was not obviously a hero.
We have done an awful lot of writing about people who are clearly heroes in the popular mind.
Private detectives, fighter pilots, and whatnot.
I wanted to take someone who was a villain in the popular mind and use him as my hero, as my central character.
And obviously, a torturer, an executioner, which Severian as well as a torturer at various parts in the book, is such a character.
And he was the one that I pass on to him.
But in many respects, I responded to Severian as a good man, in one sense he's a healer in fact, a very sensitive person.
Ah, well, I think that's precisely true.
If he had been a thoroughgoing villain, then there would have been no real purpose, as far as I'm concerned, in dealing with him in the book.
What I wanted to show was that a person could find himself in some such situation and yet be fundamentally a decent man.
Okay, the claw itself, the jewel, the gem that Severian has, from what I understood, that has no inherent power.
It's only an exercise of Severian's power which comes from beyond the stars. Is that right?
Basically, yes, that's right. Again, this is something that we will be, or I will be dealing with, we, Severian and I, will be dealing with in more detail in the fifth book.
But essentially, you're right. The claw is a magic gem in the popular imagination, but only in the popular imagination. It's actually a reliquary.
Okay, why, I'm not sure this is going to be a very graceful question, but why do you have such an intimate connection with the dead people in that book? It's a very important part of it.
Perhaps you could tell me a little bit more about what you mean by the question, because I'm not sure I understand.
Yeah, okay. I guess sometimes we're in Severian's mind and he talks about the fact that everything we are, everything we have comes from the dead, from people who are no longer here.
I think you have some other characters also say that. And of course, the, I guess, the claw bringing some people back to life and the way these people are buried in that lake and so forth.
It just seemed to me that you put a lot of emphasis on people who are dead.
Well, I think that that is appropriate to the kind of society that I have imagined. Very old societies tend to be that way.
And I think that the way that we are, I think, the way that we are, I think, is the easiest example that comes to mind is when people are surrounded by the evidences of the past and the very distant past,
as we are not in the United States, their minds tend to dwell on that, on the, the fact that the board on which they move is a board which has been built by generations which passed away long, long ago.
I think that this is why the Chinese went into ancestor worship as they did for many, many hundreds of years. For example, China is a very old country and the Chinese people have been essentially in that one spot for the length of their civilization.
Our own civilization, I think, is basically Samaritan, but it has moved around the Mediterranean and then into southern Europe and then into southern, pardon me, into northern Europe and then essentially across the Atlantic here so that we don't have that feeling.
But if our descendants are still here, let's say, 10,000 years from now, they will very much have that feeling about us, or at least I expect that they will have that feeling about us.
Okay, I think each volume in that series has at least one so-called tale within a tale, and I know that's a literary device. And I wonder why you use it so frequently.
Well, in the first place, because I like it myself, and I tend to think that, but I like other readers well-liked. There are also mechanical reasons. The tale within the tale can be used as a spacer, as a break between high climactic scenes, and it can be very useful in that way.
It can also sort of divide the book, separate the first half from the second half when it seems desirable to do that. I did that in the Clause of the Consiliator, for example, in which the tale of the student in the sun comes right at the center of the book.
And it's also in sort of the lictor, where the tale of the boy called Frog is in the middle of the book and essentially is splitting the halves. And you can also use it to reveal character sometimes, as I did, for example, in the fourth book, where I had the various people in the hospital each tell a story.
This is a question, this is very, very old literary technique. It goes back to the Middle Ages, at least, perhaps beyond that, for all I know. You can use it to foreshadow things. You can also use it to show parts of the society that would not otherwise be seen, as I tried to give a glimpse of Foila's life on the campus.
And I think that's the story in the fourth book, the Cibedal of the Ocar.
Okay, every once in a while with one of those tales, particularly those two you just mentioned, the tale of a student in the sun and the tale of a boy called Frog. I thought I was catching some echoes or some reflections, say, from Greek myth, or the one about the boy called Frog.
There was a reference to Squanto and planning of the fish and so forth. I suppose that was deliberate.
Oh, certainly. The basic story in the tale of the boy called Frog is the Mowgli stories by Rigor Kimplit. Mowgli is Frog in Hindustani.
What I was trying to show a little bit was that stories that we think of as distinct may very well tend to blend in the future, so that things that we think separate become attached to one another.
A story becomes part of a larger story, or even though I wasn't showing this as part of a story cycle. And I was interested in other words, in the evolution of those stories.
In the case of the tale of the boy called Frog, there is Greek myth in there. Let's see, early summer is the goddess Juno. Spring wind is the goddess Mars after whom, pardon me, is the god Mars after whom March was named and so forth.
Okay, very good. I thought I saw a few analogs, maybe your models behind Baldander's too, and I wondered if you had anything behind him that you were modeling him on.
Oh, yeah, half a dozen things. There's a little piece of Frankenstein, or I should say a little piece of Frankenstein's monster in there.
That is certainly a sure, a true. You'll find, I think, a little bit of borrowing from Moby Dick in the character of Baldander's.
I borrowed the name from the book of imaginary beings by George Lewis Boris, who describes a monster called Baldander's, who was a shape changer as the tritons and proteas and so forth were supposed to be.
And I thought it was a good name for a character who continued to grow indefinitely, which is what Baldander's does.
He also reminded me of, I'm a teacher of the Middle Ages, made evilist, that's my field. And I caught some echoes there of a giant fighting a knight when he fights the Varian because he uses a club which he tries to smash him with.
And I wondered if that was part of it too.
Oh, yes, absolutely. Absolutely. This was the image that I wanted, the Jack and the Giant killer image with the castle and the tower and so forth.
Okay, good. I'm also a reader of Jack Vance, and I think I caught an echo of him when you talk about the Deodans and even the idea of the dying earth.
Oh, yes, absolutely. Absolutely. I owe a great deal to Jack Vance, and I'm not about to deny it. I love the dying earth. I read it. I don't know how many times, probably four or five times, sincerely.
And yeah, it's in many ways, it's the same type of story.
Good. Okay, now this next one you may not want to answer until you finish the Earth of the New Sun, but those who walk the corridors, those from the other universe, the time travelers and so forth, are they guiding man to the New Sun to a new age?
Yeah, they are guiding man toward the New Sun, yes. And more than that, they are trying to shape humanity into something that will be ethically acceptable.
Okay, and on this Earth, they do their work through the Autarch. They choose him and make him their agent, right?
He is certainly one of their agents, yes. They also act for themselves, and they also may manipulate other characters, they're certainly not limited to the Autarch. But since the Autarch is the ruler of the country, he's obviously a fulcrum for power, and they use him in that way.
Of course, the fact that they do have time travel makes it possible for them to prophesy, if you want to put it that way, and pass along to him information that will be of great value, and obtain a good deal of cooperation from him.
The Autarch is in a very precarious situation because he is ruling over a rebellious nobility, the exultant, and the Autarch himself is not a member of that class and is not acceptable to that class, which is why Vodalus is in revolt against him.
And in that situation, and with a foreign war going on against the Achean, he needs every bit of help that he can get.
Okay, I don't have a very logical mind, and time travel stories confuse the Dickens out of me. I got the impression at the end that perhaps, it's almost a closed circle kind of time travel thing, where a civilian may be coming back.
Well, let's just, a civilian's impression that there is a, that he himself is the second cycle. In other words, that he was, has already gone through the business of winning the Autarchy and been sent back, and that's what he expresses, I think, at the end of the fourth book.
Okay, would, just a couple more big ones on this, and I'll be done with it. This may be too big for you even to want to answer, but is the book of the new son a religious work?
Well, it is in part a religious work, it certainly isn't wholly a religious work. What I tried to do in the book was touch upon the things that I thought were important to mankind.
One of the important things is saving the earth, which is something that we have only, only in this century have we realized that it needed saving, but we now realize that it does. And in the earth, as it is, I mean, it's very apparent that it does.
If something isn't done, something positive, not just the kind of thing that we have where perhaps we could save it if we would reframe from poisoning the sea and killing the whales, but if something positive isn't done, the planet is going to freeze.
Another important element in human life is religion, and so I tried to touch on that. I also tried to touch on the family, on raising children and whatnot at various places in the book.
How long did it take you to write All Four?
Let's see. I began in the summer of 1975 and turned in the last book in the summer of 1981, I believe. That would be five years, my son. Miss Connie.
And I understand that you had the All Four written before you had any published, is that right?
Depends on what you mean by written. What I did was to write All Four in first draft, and then go back and do All Four in second draft.
And then I did the final drafts, which I think were about two more drafts, on the first book on Shadow of the Torture, and then sent that out to market.
Are you satisfied or pleased with the series?
Oh, yes. I think it's probably the best thing I've done, and it's most certainly the biggest thing I've done.
The reason I ask that is I wonder what you do for an encore after you've written a series like that?
Well, I'm not sure that I'm going to be called upon for an encore. I am trying to do the coda, and I have another novel in the works, a completely unrelated novel.
I'm not sure that there will be people who will say that the book, The New Sun, is the best thing I've ever done.
There are people who say that peace is the best thing I've ever done, and there are people who say that the fifth head of service is the best thing I've ever done.
I just try and do each book as well as I can.
Okay, there's one more question on this. You mentioned the coda. I assume that's The Earth of the New Sun. Is that going to be the title of that one?
Yes.
Okay, you've been referring to it briefly, but I take it that that will be simply a background rather than a narrative.
Oh, no. No, it's a narrative. It picks up in ten years after the end of the Citadel of the Autark when he is ready to leave Earth to face his trial and attempt to bring the New Sun, and it takes him through those events.
Okay, I thought perhaps it might be something like Tolkien's Silmarillion.
No, no, I don't think it would be comparable to that, actually.
Okay, do you... Oh, yeah, I'm sorry, there was one more here. I know every time you're interviewed you're asked this, but I feel obligated because I can't help it.
If we extracted, or if I extracted the elements of that story, the book of The New Sun from it, say the time travel, the Earth being in danger, the aliens and so forth,
it could have been written almost as a space opera or something, and I wondered why you wrote it the way you did with the particular style and complexity.
Well, I think that, you know, if you want to reduce any story, any work to the lowest common denominator, you can do that.
I assume that you could take a warranties and do it as a soap opera or a romance novel or something, but I don't think that that's necessarily the best way to do it.
I think that a novel should be written in a way that is compatible to its subject matter, and I was writing about a very old society.
With a very complicated history, I won't say that the society is complex. I don't think it's as complex as ours now, but its history is much more complex than ours, and I tried to do that in a way and with the tone that I thought was appropriate to the setting.
Okay, good. Okay, I'd like to go on for just a little bit, some things about your background, and then if we have time to ask a little bit more about some of your other works.
Did you grow up reading science fiction? Were you a fan type?
I wasn't a fan in the sense of being a member of fandom, but when I was growing up fandom was very, very small.
I graduated from high school in 1949. I read the first paperback science fiction anthology that was ever printed. That was my introduction to science fiction.
I read the old science fiction pulp magazines like Starling Stories, Brill & Wunder Stories, until they went out of existence. So I was an early reader of science fiction, yes.
But I never went to a science fiction convention until the World Con in St. Louis, which I think was 1969.
When did you begin writing it? What were the circumstances that led you to that?
Really, I was looking for a way to make some money on the side over and above my salary. I had written for College Magazine while I was at Texas A&M, and it occurred to me that I might be able to write some material and sell it and bring in a little extreme cup.
My wife and I were living in a two room furnished apartment at the time. We had just been married. We neither of us had any money, and we had to have enough money to make a down payment on furniture before we could get out of it.
Writing did not turn out to be the source of quick money that I hoped it would at the time, but I guess I caught the bug and I kept up with it.
I think it was in the Fifth Ed of Cerberus you dedicated or something to Damon Knight. What was his influence on your writing?
Well, he was the first editor to buy me regularly and take a real interest in what I did. He was my teacher, the wise old man in Heinlein books. Mine was Damon Knight.
Have you ever considered taking up writing full time?
Oh yeah, I'll probably do that eventually, but I'm getting to the age now where eventually nobody will let me do anything else.
If I remember your degree, one of your degrees at least in college was in mechanical engineering.
That's the only degree I have.
Okay, and I think you worked in that field for a while and now you're an editor, is that right?
Yes, that's correct. I was a mechanical engineer for 16 years and now I'm an editor on a technical magazine for engineers, plant engineering.
With that kind of background, particularly the engineering background and the, if I remember your first novel, Two Operation Aries, was a little bit more hard science than you usually write.
I would have assumed from your background and your beginning and so forth that you might have become a hard science writer and I wondered how you sort of drifted into the kind of style and technique you use.
I don't know except, you know, anything I would say would be speculation, perhaps because I deal with it daily.
I'm anxious to get away from it for a while when I'm at the typewriter. That's about the only thing I can guess.
You have to remember now that when I'm writing the book of the new sun or whatever, I've been spending the previous day writing articles about hydraulic systems or welding machines or something along those lines.
I'm now for plant engineering, I'm doing a series of three articles on industrial robots, for example.
And although I certainly have nothing against robots or welding machines or hydraulics, you don't want to live and breathe any one thing all the time, or at least I don't think that I do.
Okay, I know you've written some mainstream works, but I wondered why you concentrate on science fiction and fantasy rather than mainstream.
Well, I don't really think I concentrate on it. I tend to write the stories that appeal to me. Most mainstream today, as far as I can see it, there are, well, it's either about a couple who have been married for about ten years and both of whom teach at a college and who don't like each other,
or it's about a woman who has just returned to Nova Scotia after her divorce with two small children and finds an old crunk in the attic and starts going through it.
And I don't really much like those types of stories. I tend to write the sort of thing that I think that I would enjoy if someone else had written it, Jack Vance, for example, and I picked it up on the newsstand.
Okay, particularly with a series like The Book of the New Son, I've often wondered that it seems to me an author, what you put into that series must have been an immense amount of yourself and an immense amount of work.
And I wondered if you pay a heavy price for your writing. I mean, in terms of, I don't know, do you have to write? Do you do it for enjoyment? Is it something that is difficult for you to do?
Yeah, it's difficult, but if you're a tennis player, I think it's difficult to play good tennis. I'm not a tennis player, goodness says. But you may nevertheless enjoy playing tennis, particularly if you do it well, or at least you're able to convince yourself that you do it well.
And I enjoy writing. It's hard, it's hard work. It's not hard work compared to digging a big hole in hard ground on a hot day, but it's hard work in the sense that we normally talk about hard work, which is perhaps a little childish of us.
But still it's something that I like to do. As for paying a price, you know, what would I be doing with that time if I were not writing, watching reruns of MASH on TV or something of the sort? And I really don't find that sort of thing all that rewarding.
Okay, are you a disciplined writer? Do you work according to schedule or do you just move as the muse comes to you?
Well, I write almost every day, usually in the morning before I go to work. So I suppose I'm disciplined in that way. I don't wait for inspiration, if that's what it is, because I think if you wait for inspiration, inspiration really never comes.
You have to sit down and start trying to do some work, and then perhaps you do get a certain inspiration.
Okay, one more on your style, I guess, and I'll be tying up this area. Do you identify or are there any influences on the style, the technique that you use to write? Is that just something that's naturally evolved?
Oh, I'm sure when you say it's naturally evolved, that doesn't mean there are influences. I'm not consciously copying another writer, if that's what you mean. But I've read Jack Vance, who we already mentioned. I've read Lord Dunsini, I've read Oh, HB Lovecraft, and what have you.
And I'm sure that some of that has rubbed off on me. Why shouldn't it? You know, if you were not imitating other people in the way that you speak, I wouldn't be able to understand you. Do you know what I mean?
Oh, yeah. I notice in a lot of your stories, the book of the new son, the fifth head of Cerberus, some others too, that you often use a limited narrator, one who's, well, I guess the opposite of an omniscient author. And I wondered why that technique was so attractive to you.
I think because a limited narrator tends to see things more clearly, the omniscient author who sees everything really can't see very many things very well. If your narrator is a child or is a woman, you can't see everything.
He's a relatively simple person. He sees what is actually going on and does not see them in terms of some philosophical construct.
Okay, good. Are you an optimistic man about the future?
I suppose I am in an age in which nuclear war is possible. I don't really think it's going to happen. I do think that space travel is going to happen. So I guess I would have to say I'm an optimist.
In other words, you would think that the influence of science, if it's used correctly, could be good rather than bad.
Well, if it's used correctly as an enormous cop-up, I think that overall the influence of science is good and will be good for us. Obviously, it's misused. It's always going to be misused to some extent.
I don't think that it's ever going to be so misused that we will be so badly off that we would be better off if we didn't have it.
And we're living in caves and trying to drive the buffalo over the cliff by riding brush fires.
Okay, do you... Maybe this is something you don't think about. It's no big deal. But every author we talk to, we always ask him or her, do you think there should be a distinction between science fiction and mainstream literature, or is it just simply an artificial category?
I think that it is an artificial category, in the sense that publishers are trying to point their customers toward books of the type that the customer is looking for.
I think that the term science fiction or the term fantasy or the term mystery, for that matter, is essentially a marketing label which has to do with the retailing of books as product.
And I don't really feel that it's something that the writer has much business with. The writer isn't really concerned in marketing the books. He's concerned about marketing the manuscript, so to speak.
Do you have any useful distinction between science fiction and fantasy?
I'm not sure that the distinction can be useful. The difference between science fiction and fantasy is very largely a matter of viewpoint.
This is what I've tried to bring together somewhat by writing science fantasy in which we treat scientific matters, the old spaceships that form the towers of the citadel, the time travel, any of those things that you want to take, or Bald Ender's method of prolonging his life, by writing science fiction.
We're prolonging the juvenile phase of cellular growth in his body. We treat those from the standpoint that it's normally used in treating creatures of pure imagination like the March Hare, or mythical creatures like the Centaur.
But you see, you have to ask yourself what is actually possible as opposed to what is acceptable.
At this point, as an engineering journalist and a follower of science, I'm certainly not a scientist, a Centaur, which we consider a fantasy creature, is much nearer to being realized than an interstellar spaceship, and certainly much nearer to being realized than a fastest little night drive.
If you talk to a physicist and say, how can we make it faster than light drive? The physicist really only has the biggest possible ideas. If he doesn't just say you can't, and many physicists would say flatly that you can't, but a molecular geneticist today could tell you a good deal about how it might be possible to make a Centaur.
I've been doing this for about 20 years from now, but by attitude, we call the Centaur a fantasy and the faster than light ship to science fiction.
That's excellent. That's one of the best answers I've heard for that. That's very good.
Okay, listen, the last part of the interview, it's not going to last as long as the others, I'm sure, is I just want to ask a few more questions about your work if you're still okay. Is that all right?
Sure.
Okay, the fifth head of Cerberus, the novella itself, what I have is one volume, the fifth head of Cerberus and then the other two that go with it. That first story, was there a particular impetus or origin behind that one that you could state?
Yes, actually there was. You're probably not at all familiar, well perhaps you are familiar with it, perhaps your listeners will be. There's a Phil Farmer story called The Riders of the Purple Wage, and I read that story, which is a very good story.
It sort of excited me and I thought, gee, that was a good story, but if it had been my story, I would have done this, and then I would have done that instead of what filled it here, and I would have done this other thing instead of what filled it here.
About then I realized that I really had a completely different story, and the completely different story that I had worked out to be the fifth head of Cerberus.
How did the other two come to be written? When you sat down to write the fifth head of Cerberus, did you have the plan of all three in front of you?
No, no, not at all. I wrote the fifth head of Cerberus for Orbit, which was a series edited for years by Damon Knight, and I took it as my Milford conference story when I went to the Milford Writers Conference, and it was read there by Norbert Slupian, who at that time was an editor for the
script, as he's been gone for many, many years now. And he said, you know, if you will write two other stories of the appropriate length, we'll make a book with this, and so I went back home and wrote a tale by John V. Mark and sent that to him and said, how about this?
And he said that's fine, and he gave me a contract, and so I then wrote the DRT to finish out the volume.
Okay, I wasn't sure, but with those three stories, I caught a little hint of, I'm not going to say criticism, maybe, but perhaps commentary on some situations on earth, perhaps the way the avos were treated, the use of cloning, the repressive government and so forth, and I wondered if that was meant to be a comment on certain situations we have today?
Of course. A writer, any writer, you cannot write without, to some degree, reflecting the things that are going on in his actual life. You can't enter the theoretical ivory power and completely separate yourself from contemporary history or from contemporary attitudes if they happen to be your attitudes.
So surely, I'm sure you saw some of that. The avos, of course, that was very close to the fate of just about every aboriginal tribe that's been contacted by a higher civilization. The secret police and so forth in BRT are the sort of thing that goes on in most of the countries of the world today.
And pretty much has gone on wherever there's an organized government.
The second story, a tale by Marsh. Was there made up out of whole cloth, or were you basing it on some, say, some myths or legends of some aboriginal people?
No, I just started that with the idea of, you remember, I talked a moment ago about the people living in the caves and driving the buffalo over the cliff. I had been interested in the argument or the discussion about which came first, tools or people, which is one that anthropologists have.
It's fairly easy to imagine that at some point man evolved. It's pretty hard to imagine that that first man who evolved then figured out how to make the first flint knife. You know, I doubt it. He would have to be pretty smart.
So did as many anthropologists feel, did the prehumans that he evolved from develop the flint knife? Or was there a period at which human beings were human beings but had no tools whatsoever?
No ability to work except with the parts of their body, as say an anteater or a mayor does or whatever. And so I thought that was an interesting idea. And I tried to do it as a story.
And I did it as, of course, John V. Marsh is an anthropologist in the other stories, both Fifth Ed of Cerberus and BRT. And so I pinned the speculation on him and made it his speculation about what life on that world was like before the first spaceships came.
I don't suppose you'd tell me if the person writing the journal in prison, or the person in prison in that third story is an abo or is really Marsh. I think he's an abo myself.
Well, he is, I think, pretty obviously the title character of the story.
Okay, okay, that's fine. Okay, just for a moment, let me move on to a book which I like very much, The Devil and a Forest. Was there an idea or an impetus behind that one?
Oh, yes. What I wanted to do there was to write a book in which the protagonist did not belong to the upper 5% of society. Almost invariably, if somebody writes a story about the Middle Ages, they write about someone who is the son of some sort of lord or a lordling
or at the very, very least square. And this person is very, very frequently the secret heir to a throne somewhere, something I wanted to write about the sort of people that we are 95% descended from.
The medieval peasants, the poor people of the towns or of the countryside. And so I picked a poor orphan boy who was an apprentice weaver in a little medieval village and took him from there.
Okay, listen, Mr. Will, David has to switch the tape over. Can you give us about 5 more minutes after we do that?
Sure.
Okay, yeah, we run out of one full tape here and we just switch it over and do it on the other side. That's what he's doing now.